What is happening to house prices, and could there be a crash?Published7 hours agoShareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharingBy Robert Cuffe & Christine JeavansBBC NewsHouse prices have fallen in recent months, as growing interest rates have made mortgages more expensive, and high inflation has reduced people's spending power. But mortgage interest rates may be stabilising. How might this affect house prices? What is happening to house prices around the UK?Prices rose steeply - by about 25% - across most of the UK from the start of 2020 until Autumn 2022. But they have fallen by about 4% from that peak according to February's figures from Nationwide. Those recent changes build on very different patterns of growth over the last 15 years. Northern Ireland's house prices have still have not returned to the levels seen before 2008 global financial crisis.In contrast, London and the South East saw prices recover quickly up until 2015, then saw less growth during the race-for-space period of the pandemic, which saw many people relocate to cheaper areas. 


Your device may not support this visualisation





What happens when house prices fall?The biggest immediate effect is on people who want to move.Some sellers may delay putting their homes on the market. Homeowners who are considering moving may find they have less money to spend. Image source, Getty ImagesAsking prices have not fallen far enough to balance the increased cost of interest rates, so first time buyers are unlikely find buying a house more affordable in the short term. In the longer run, if wages increase faster than house prices recover, housing will become more affordable. Those longer term trends also depend on whether housebuilding keeps up with demand. What has happened to the government's housebuilding target? Will house prices crash?The UK's largest lender, Lloyds, is planning for an 7% fall in 2023. In March, the Office of Budget Responsibility (OBR), which advises the government on the health of the economy - predicted that house prices will drop by 10% over the next two years.That would be about half the size of the fall seen during the financial crisis of 2008 and put prices back to where they were in autumn 2021. But predictions are very uncertain.Interest rates may have stabilised. The rates offered for fixed rate mortgage deals have come down from their peak, and experts hope that the rate which sets the cost for trackers or variable rate mortgages may also be at or close to the top. How high could interest rates go? Why are prices rising so much?But interest ratesare still higher than they were a year ago, and and that has affected the market.A small uptick in the number of new mortgages in February did not undo the sharp falls seen at the end of 2022.  About 100,000 households come off a fixed-price mortgage each month. They will be hit by new, higher rates.Some homeowners may find their new monthly payments unaffordable, making them more likely to sell, possibly pushing prices down. 




A modern browser with JavaScript and a stable internet connection is required to view this interactive.


How much could my mortgage go up by?


How much are you borrowing?


If you have an existing mortgage enter the outstanding balance left to pay. If not, enter the total you are looking to borrow.








£


How long will you take to pay it back?


If you have an existing mortgage enter the total number of years remaining. If not, enter the total number of years you are looking to borrow over.








years




What is your current...


For those with a mortgage enter the rate for your current fixed term. For those without a mortgage enter an interest rate from another source, such as a bank's mortgage rate calculator.





interest rate



monthly payment




interest rate







%



Choose an interest rate to compare with…







%





At this rate, your payments could change by…


                            monthly change
to

                            monthly total








The information you provided on your monthly payments would not be sufficient to pay off your mortgage within the number of years given.


This calculator does not constitute financial advice. It is based on a standard mortgage repayment formula based on the mortgage size and length and a fixed interest rate. It should be used as a guide only and does not represent the suitability, eligibility or availability of mortgage offers for users. For exact figures, users will need to approach an official mortgage lender.
Interest rates fluctuate based on the Bank of England's base rate and market conditions.




Are people struggling to pay their mortgage?The Financial Conduct Authority believes that there are more potentially "financially stretching" mortgages in London and the South Eastthan in the rest of the country.Loans in the south tend to be very high compared with borrowers' incomes. This can make the loans difficult to repay when mortgage rates rise or inflation bites. This analysis is one way to look for potential areas of weakness in the market. But it doesn't guarantee that people in these areas will fall behind on their mortgage payments. Most borrowers in recent years have had their ability to pay checked against higher interest rates than the ones we're currently seeing. Lending rules were tightened after the 2008 crash to help ensure people were better prepared for a more difficult economic climate. What happens if I can't afford to pay my mortgage?Fortunately, the number of people behind on their mortgages did not rise significantly in 2022 and was still at half the 2008 level.  The number of repossessions in 2022 was also less than a tenth of what was seen in the years after the crash.  The amount people can spend of their mortgage also depends on wider cost-of-living pressures: on energy bills, wages and job security.And these factors can all change significantly. The future of house prices depends on the economy as a whole, and that picture is also uncertain. Data visualisation by Rob England and Jana Tauschinski. Additional reporting by Jack Rodgers and Helena RosieckaRelated TopicsPersonal financeHousing marketCost of livingUK economyMortgages

India's middle class hit by rising cost of livingPublished14 December 2022Shareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharingImage source, Getty ImagesImage caption, The rapid rise in the price of food and fuel in India is hitting household budgetsBy Archana ShuklaBBC Business Correspondent"We are really surviving on a day to day basis. Salaries are the same but expenses [are] at least double."A steep rise in the price of essentials was already a drain for Santa, but when her landlord raised monthly rents by nearly two-thirds in June, it was a direct hit. Santa, a 32-year-old social worker and teacher, and her husband live in the tech city of Bengaluru. They both provide for their respective families, while managing their own expenses. Santa is the sole provider for five members of her family and has two jobs in order to earn extra money.Their landlord raised the rent from 7,000 rupees ($86; £70) to Rs11,500 all in one go to compensate for not having put it up during the pandemic, but Santa says this is just bad timing. Prices of perishables and food have almost doubled in the past year. The rapid rate at which prices have risen, especially for food and fuel, is eating into the households' budgets. Even though retail inflation eased to a three-month low in October, that's brought little relief. Image source, Getty ImagesImage caption, Consumer goods sales hit a record high during Diwali, but cheaper products didn't sell as wellNow the family, whose monthly income is Rs20,000, has had to rework its expenses. This means cutting down on all frills and even some essentials. "My parents love their tea, but for the last one year they must not have had milk tea. I buy dry groceries in limited quantities, only as much as we need, but daily expenses on fresh milk, vegetables, meat has been unmanageable."As a social worker Santa's job requires her to travel across the city, but bus fares have risen significantly. "A daily bus pass which used to cost Rs30 earlier, now costs nearly Rs90."The pandemic had already drained resources for Santa's family leaving them with limited disposable income. "I have no savings left. I have even pawned my gold jewellery last year when my father was hospitalised."Covid, followed by the Russia-Ukraine war and the supply chain disruptions made everything expensive. Burdened by this dual blow there has been a perceptible change in consumption patterns in India - particularly among middle and lower income families. The dichotomy in India's economic recovery is apparent. Image source, Getty ImagesImage caption, Internet sales were strong during the festival season in September and OctoberA look at the buoyant stock markets and big companies' strong quarterly profit statements shows the shiny growth story. But a closer look reveals a widening economic disparity. Most consumer goods companies have seen a drop in sales of entry-level or value products - from footwear to mobile phones to biscuits. Expensive brands, however, performed better than the mass market products. Even during the festival season in September and October, when consumer goods sales were at a record high, it was the essentials and high-end products that did the best. Sales of entry-level products across all categories saw a near 10% decline compared with last year. E-commerce in India saw a strong festive season in September and October with sales of nearly Rs755bn, according to a report by market intelligence firm RedSeer. But the finer print shows the average spend per customer has stayed subdued.After two years of Covid lockdowns and quieter festivities, Indians geared up to celebrate the festival of lights in full fervour. Streets were lit up and people decorated their houses with electric lights and earthen lamps. But it seems the celebrations in many households differed from previous years.Consumers did indulge despite the rapid rise in prices, but not everyone joined in - and those who did were choosy.The impact was more pronounced in rural and semi-urban India, home to more than half of the country's huge middle class.Image source, SarikaImage caption, Sarika's food bill has almost doubled in the past yearSarika, a 47-year-old housewife, is one of them. She chose to recycle old dresses for the big annual festival of Diwali in October. While it is a tradition to buy new clothes for the festival, Sarika says the family has been making cuts in almost everything - from clothes to sweets and even basic foodstuffs.Her monthly food bill has almost doubled in the past year. "From edible oils, to wheat, to cereals, vegetables - all have become costlier by 30-50%. Family expenses have almost doubled in last one year, we cannot afford to buy new clothes for everyone." What's not rising is Sarika's family income. Her husband's watch shop is seeing fewer customers as they hold on to their old watches for longer or shift to online sales. The family farm suffered crop losses due to unseasonal rainfall: "I had to prioritise daily needs and paying school and college fees my three children over other necessities," she says.Sarika says the excitement surrounding the festival was already low as her son didn't travel from Pune, 150km (93 miles) from Mumbai, for Diwali. Why? Because the bus fares had almost doubled and he saved that money to pay his hostel bills that month."It hurts the most when you cannot even enjoy the small pleasures of life, just because you do not have enough money."As the rising cost of living continues to bite and with no relief in sight, families are making hard decisions about their futures too. Santa and her husband, married for three years now, were planning to buy a house in Bengaluru and start a family. But all plans have been shelved for now. "When we ourselves are struggling, how can we raise a child in this condition?"Related TopicsCost of livingIndia

Bank of England on heightened alert for further banking turmoilPublished2 days agoShareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharingImage source, Getty ImagesThe Bank of England is on "heightened" alert for further turmoil in the banking sector, its governor has said.However, Andrew Bailey told MPs the recent problems facing lenders had not caused stress in the UK banking system.Officials have tried to calm investors since Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank failed, sparking concerns about the stability of other lenders.In Europe, worries over the strength of Swiss banking giant Credit Suisse led to a rushed takeover by rival UBS.Nerves among investors have sparked sharp falls in banking shares around the world. Mr Bailey told MPs on the Treasury Committee that the Bank of England would "go on being vigilant".He said we were in a period of "very heightened, frankly, tension and alertness".The collapse of Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) was the biggest US banking failure since the 2008 financial crisis, and left depositors struggling to get their money out.The collapse was linked to recent rises in interest rates which had hit the value of SVB's assets. US regulators had to step in to protect customers, while the lender's UK arm was rescued by HSBC.Failed lender Silicon Valley Bank bought by rivalBank shares hit as investor nerves returnThe episode has generated heated debate in the US about whether SVB was subject to appropriate supervision and if officials responded properly to its collapse.At a hearing in Washington on Tuesday, financial regulators called the failure "a textbook case of mismanagement," casting blame on SVB leaders for failing to adjust strategies as interest rates rose last year, despite warnings from officials. But they faced questions from senators who said the episode had also revealed failures in oversight."It looks like regulators knew the problem but nobody dropped the hammer," said Senator Jon Tester, a Democrat from Montana.UK banking officials admitted to MPs that the speed of the SVB's collapse had taken them by surprise and may mean that banking rules may need updating.Mr Bailey said it was "the fastest collapse from health to death" since the UK's Barings Bank failed in 1995 after suffering heavy losses resulting from fraudulent investments.Sam Woods, the chief executive of the Prudential Regulation Authority, noted that SVB UK saw about a third of its deposits - £3bn - withdrawn on one day.He twice suggested to the MPs that the stress tests applied to UK banks to make sure they can withstand a crisis would need to be looked at, given how new technology meant deposits could be withdrawn electronically in seconds.However, Mr Bailey told MPs he did not think the UK was in a position similar to the 2008 global financial crisis, when banks stopped lending to each other, plunging the world into a deep recession.He added that while rising interest rates were "an issue" for US banks, they were less likely to affect UK lenders because they were regulated differently.In the US the head of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp, Michael Gruenberg, said the SVB saga had shown the increased risk of bank runs at at a time when "money can flow out of institutions with incredible speed in response to news amplified through social media channels". He and other regulators in the US expressed support for strengthening banking rules, changes which some politicians such as Elizabeth Warren have championed.But stricter regulation is opposed by Republicans - reducing the chance of it happening. Related TopicsHSBCUK economyBank of EnglandAndrew BaileyBankingMore on this storyFailed lender Silicon Valley Bank bought by rival3 days agoBank shares hit as investor nerves return6 days agoUK banking system 'safe' after Credit Suisse rescue20 MarchCentral banks rush to keep cash flowing20 March

