Blood tests may spare cancer patients chemoPublished1 day agoShareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharingImage caption, Ben Cooke avoided chemo thanks to the blood testsBy Fergus WalshMedical editor A blood test which can detect traces of cancer cells could spare thousands of patients unnecessary chemotherapy every year.A major bowel cancer trial is examining whether the test can show if surgery has removed all of the tumour.Doctors say half of patients with stage 3 bowel cancer are cured by surgery alone so by using chemotherapy they are over-treating many people. About 1,600 bowel cancer patients are being recruited to the UK study.Ben Cooke runs a hair salon on the King's Road in Chelsea, London, and also works as a stylist for fashion shoots. In early March last year, he noticed some dark blood in his poo. He rang NHS 111 and was sent to A&E. He was diagnosed with stage 3 bowel cancer, which was successfully treated with surgery.  The gold standard treatment is to then have intravenous chemotherapy to mop up any remaining tumour cells and reduce the risk of the cancer returning.  But the chemotherapy used in bowel cancer, oxaliplatin, can cause painful tingling and numbness in the hands and feet, called peripheral neuropathy.This nerve damage can be long-term, and Ben was worried it might affect his ability to do the job he loves.   "I would not be able to cope with that," he says. "I need to work - it's my therapy."The 52-year-old enrolled in a study at London's Royal Marsden Hospital, which is evaluating whether a blood test can show if chemo is really needed. His test showed he was clear of cancer, so he avoided intravenous chemotherapy.Instead, like everyone taking part in the trial, he took an oral chemo tablet twice a day. This had minimal side effects and allowed him to carry on working.  "The fact that I didn't have any tingling in my hands has just been an absolute blessing," he says.Image caption, Ben's blood is extracted for the liquid biopsyThe blood tests work by looking for microscopic traces of cancer in the bloodstream called circulating tumour DNA. The presence of these markers indicates whether the patient has been cured by their surgery or not. Such tiny fragments would be invisible on a scan. Ben's consultant at the Marsden, Dr Naureen Starling, is the principal investigator on the trial. She says the outcome could affect the way thousands of bowel cancer patients are treated every year."Half of patients with stage 3 bowel cancer are cured by surgery alone, so we are over-treating a large proportion of patients," she says.The hope is that this specialised technology could spare many cancer patients unnecessary chemotherapy."That's good for the patient, it's good for the health service, it's good for cost savings within the NHS. That would be a win-win," says Dr Starling.Image caption, The liquid biopsies being packaged to send to CaliforniaThe trial, called TRACC, is using a test created by US company Guardant Health. The samples are sent to their labs in California for analysis with the results coming back within around two weeks. Survival outcomesThe trial, funded by the National Institute for Health & Care Research (NIHR), will examine any difference in survival rates after three years between those patients whose treatment was guided by the blood test compared with the standard-of-care chemotherapy group.Trials are also under way in the UK to monitor patients with lung and breast cancer in the same way.Dr Starling says the potential for this new technology across cancer care is "immense", not just when it comes to detecting residual disease after surgery, but also for early diagnosis.What is clear already, from multiple studies, is that so-called "liquid biopsy" blood tests can reveal the lingering presence of cancer long before it would be found using traditional methods. A trial in Greece published in Nature in January, found that liquid biopsies could show cancer recurrence at least four years before it would be detectable via a scan. That study followed a small group of breast cancer patients after surgery.At the American Society of Clinical Oncology conference in Chicago last June, a study in 455 bowel cancer patients found that by using the blood tests to guide treatment, the number of patients needing post-surgery chemotherapy was nearly halved without the risk of relapse.But Dr Starling says the far bigger randomised trial in the UK is essential to calibrate exactly how much reliance can be placed on liquid biopsies, especially when it means considering the withdrawal of chemotherapy.The tests have already been available to private patients. Susanne Winter, an artist from Surrey, was diagnosed with stage 3 bowel cancer in March 2022 and had successful surgery to remove the tumour and some cancerous lymph nodes. She initially thought she would need chemotherapy to ensure the cancer was entirely gone, but she had the ctDNA test done privately which showed she was clear of cancer.Susanne, 58, had cancelled all her commitments to prepare for several months of chemotherapy, but the negative test result meant she was free to concentrate on her art. She even had two works accepted for the Royal Academy summer exhibition.She feels incredibly lucky to have avoided chemotherapy. "I knew how toxic it can be. You're psyching yourself up for it, so to hear that you aren't going to need it is just unbelievable," she says.Image caption, Susanne Winter was able to carry on paintingWhat is considered the holy grail of cancer detection is to be able to spot the disease at the very earliest stage, when it is most easy to cure.Blood tests are also being trialled to see if they can diagnose a whole range of cancers.More than 140,000 volunteers aged 50-77 have been recruited across England to see if the test could pick up more than 50 types of tumours, most of which have no screening programmes. The NHS-Galleri trial is made by Californian company Grail, and some interim results are due early next year.Related TopicsBowel cancerNHS

UK cosmetic procedure numbers recover after CovidPublished2 days agoShareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharingRelated TopicsCoronavirus pandemicImage source, Getty ImagesImage caption, Private cosmetic procedures are on the up according to BAAPSBy Annabel RackhamBBC NewsThe number of cosmetic procedures taking place in the UK has continued to increase following the pandemic, according to the British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (BAAPS).Breast enlargement remains the most popular surgery for women, but the number of breast reductions is also on the rise.Women underwent 93% of all recorded cosmetic procedures, BAAPS says.Anyone thinking about surgery should consider the risks before deciding.BAAPS is an organisation that looks at improving safety and innovation in cosmetic surgery.Its president Marc Pacifico says "economic uncertainty and a decrease in overall consumer spending does not seem to the deterring patients from having cosmetic surgery".The BAAPS yearly audit looks at surgery undertaken in the UK - mostly at private clinics - so does not reflect the growing number of people going abroad for cosmetic procedures.The NHS has offered advice for those considering travelling to another country for surgery.Most common cosmetic procedures in 2022Women:Breast enlargement: 6,640Breast reduction: 5,270Tummy tucks: 3,241Liposuction: 2,669 Blepharoplasty (eyelid surgery): 2,439Men:Rhinoplasty (nose job): 388Chest Reduction: 343Blepharoplasty: 339Liposuction: 333Otoplasty (ear correction): 251BAAPS says 31,057 procedures took place in 2022, which is a 102% rise from 2021 when there were 15,405 done.Private cosmetic procedures were not permitted during some of the coronavirus lockdowns.In 2019 - before the pandemic hit - BAAPS reported a total number of 28,347 surgeries taking place.Image source, Chrissi SainsburyImage caption, Chrissi pictured before her breast reduction surgery in 2022Chrissi Sainsbury, 43, decided to have a breast reduction last year after a lung scan revealed she had a lump on her breast.A mammogram showed it was non-cancerous, but due to the amount of breast tissue she had, she said she "would have never found it".Chrissi described the incident as a "wake-up call"."It was never a vanity thing for me," she told the BBC.Chrissi had the surgery privately in November 2022, going from a bra size 34HH to a 34D.According to BAAPS, breast reduction has grown significantly in popularity year-on-year.It recorded 3,743 breast reductions in women in 2018. In 2022, that number increased to 5,270 - a 40% rise.The procedure is designed to help women unhappy with the shape, weight or droop of their breasts by making them smaller and more lifted. There is an eligibility checklist used by NHS, but many women are opting to pay privately for the procedure.Seven UK patients died after Turkey weight loss surgeryBrazilian Butt Lift can be made safer say surgeonsWomen 'should be warned' of breast implant illnessChrissi says: "Before the surgery, things like drying my hair would be so difficult. "Anything that involved lifting my arms above my head was just incredibly hard."Things like the gym - I absolutely could not run, even with a proper fitted sports bra - it was like having a massive sandbag on your front."Chrissi says she no longer struggles with shoulder and neck pain or shortness of breath - something she dealt with constantly before her surgery."I can now function so much better," she adds.The NHS advises it is important to research the surgeon and clinic you have chosen before committing to any treatment. You should also be offered a cooling-off period after any consultation. Related TopicsCosmetic surgeryNHSBreast implantsCoronavirus pandemicMore on this storyWomen 'should be warned' of breast implant illness22 July 2019Women 'spurn facelifts for photo filters'7 February 2018Brazilian Butt Lift can be made safer say surgeons10 October 2022

Sniffing body odour is tested as an anxiety therapyPublished5 days agoShareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharingImage source, Getty ImagesBy Michelle RobertsDigital health editorSniffing other people's body odour might be useful in therapy for social anxiety, say Swedish researchers who have started tests with volunteers. The scientists have been using armpit sweat in their experiments. Their hunch is the smell activates brain pathways linked to emotions, offering a calming effect - but it is far too soon to say if they are right. They are presenting some of their early findings at a medical conference in Paris this week. Why and how do we smell?Babies are born with a strong sense of smell, with a preference for their mother and her breastmilk. Smell helps us humans sense danger - from food or a smoky fire, for example - and interact with our environment, as well as each other.It also makes meals more tasty and can evoke strong memories too. Aromas are detected by receptors in the upper part of the nose. Signals from these are then relayed directly to the limbic system, a brain region that is associated with memory and emotions.Can the right smell make you feel more productive?Parkinson's test - woman smelled disease on husbandSmell training to help Covid sufferersThe Swedish researchers suggest that human body odour might communicate our emotional state - happy or anxious, for instance - and even elicit similar responses in others who smell it.They asked volunteers to donate armpit sweat from when they were watching either a scary movie or a happy one. Next, 48 women with social anxiety agreed to sniff some of these samples, alongside receiving a more conventional therapy called mindfulness, where people are encouraged to focus on the here and now rather than replaying negative thoughts. Some of the women were given genuine body odour to sniff, while others - the control group - were given clean air instead. Those who were exposed to the sweat appeared to do better with the therapy.  Lead researcher Ms Elisa Vigna, of the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, said: "Sweat produced while someone was happy had the same effect as someone who had been scared by a movie clip.  So there may be something about human chemo-signals in sweat generally which affects the response to treatment. "It may be that simply being exposed to the presence of someone else has this effect, but we need to confirm this. In fact, that is what we are testing now in a follow-up study with a similar design, but where we are also including sweat from individuals watching emotionally neutral documentaries."What is sweat and does it always smell? Most of the skin's sweat is odourless. But sweat glands in the armpit and groin produce certain compounds that cause body odour. Bacteria on the skin's surface and on nearby hair follicles break down these compounds, producing others which are responsible for the smell. Duncan Boak from the charity Fifth Sense, which aims to raise awareness about smell and taste disorders, said: "We know there's a strong link between our sense of smell and our emotional wellbeing."Losing the ability to smell other people, such as your partner and children can cause depression and feelings of isolation.  "Whilst this is a preliminary study and further work is of course needed, it's very encouraging to see further research around the importance of our sense of smell to good mental health."Related TopicsAnxietyMental healthMore on this storyCan the right smell make you more productive?12 July 2022Town's 'cheese-vomit' smell identified23 May 2022New generation of deodorant 'on the way'3 July 2018'Public toilets smell nice to me now'10 February 2021Smell training recommended for Covid recovery24 April 2021Related Internet LinksPOTION ProjectEuropean Congress of PsychiatryThe BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.

What is the Marburg virus and how dangerous is it?Published23 MarchShareclose panelShare pageCopy linkAbout sharingImage source, Getty ImagesThe Marburg virus has killed five people in north-west Tanzania.The highly-infectious disease is similar to Ebola, with symptoms including fever, muscle pains, diarrhoea, vomiting and, in some cases, death through extreme blood loss. Hundreds of people have died from the virus in recent years, almost all in Africa.What is the Marburg virus and how dangerous is it?According to the World Health Organization (WHO), on average, the Marburg virus kills half of the people it infects, with previous outbreaks killing between 24% and 88% of patients.The virus was first identified in 1967 after 31 people were infected and seven died in simultaneous outbreaks in Marburg and Frankfurt in Germany, and Belgrade in Serbia. The outbreak was traced to African green monkeys imported from Uganda.   But the virus has since been linked to other animals. Image source, Getty ImagesImage caption, The Marburg virus was first traced to the African green monkeyAmong humans, it is spread mostly by people who have spent long periods in caves and mines populated by bats. In recent years, there have also been outbreaks of the Marburg virus in:  Equatorial GuineaGhanathe Democratic Republic of the CongoKenyaSouth AfricaUgandaZimbabweA 2005 outbreak in Angola killed more than 300 people.However, in the rest of the world, only two people have died from the Marburg virus in the past 40 years - one person in Europe and one in the US. Both had been on expeditions to caves in Uganda.Where have most cases been recorded?Five people have died in Tanzania's north-western Kagera region. Three other people are being treated in hospital and authorities are tracing 161 contacts. This follows an outbreak in Equatorial Guinea in February, which is known to have infected nine people and killed seven. The WHO is investigating 20 more probable cases there.Other major outbreaks include:2022, Ghana: three cases, two deaths2017, Uganda: three cases, three deaths2012, Uganda: 15 cases, four deaths2005, Angola: 374 cases, 329 deaths1998-2000, DR Congo: 154 cases, 128 deaths1967, Germany/Serbia: 31 cases, seven deathsWhat are the symptoms of the Marburg virus? The virus begins abruptly with:a feversevere headachemuscle painsThis is often followed, three days later, by:watery diarrhoeastomach painnausea vomitingAccording to the WHO, "the appearance of patients at this phase has been described as showing 'ghost-like' drawn features, deep-set eyes, expressionless faces and extreme lethargy."Many people go on to bleed from various parts of the body, and some die eight to nine days after first falling ill, because of extreme loss of blood and shock.Image source, Getty ImagesImage caption, The Egyptian rousette fruit bat is one of the main carriers of the virusHow is the Marburg virus spread?African green monkeys and pigs can carry it.The Egyptian rousette fruit bat often also harbours the virus.Among humans, it spreads through bodily fluids and contact with contaminated bedding.Even after people have recovered, their blood or semen can remain infectious for many months afterwards. How can it be treated?There are no specific treatments or a vaccine for the virus. But a range of blood products, drug and immune therapies are being developed, the WHO says.Doctors may be able to alleviate the symptoms by giving hospital patients plenty of fluids and using transfusions to replace lost blood.How can it be contained? People in Africa should avoid eating or handling bushmeat, according to Gavi, an international health organisation.People should also avoid contact with pigs in areas with an outbreak, says the WHO.Men who have had the virus should use condoms for a year after the onset of symptoms or until their semen tests negative for the virus twice.Those who bury people who have died from the virus should also avoid touching the body. Related TopicsWorld Health Organization (WHO)Infectious disease

